UCCD2203 DATABASE SYSTEMS
Lecture 7
By 
Mr. Cheang Kah Wai, Alvin
Department of Information Systems, FICT
Relational Algebra -Introduction
Relational Algebra ;
—examines the Query language associated with the relational 
model.
—is a formal, non -user-friendly languages.
—work on one or more relations to define another relation 
without changing the original relations.
—both the operands and the results are relations, and so the 
output from one operation can become the input to another 
operation. 
—illustrates the basic operations required of any DML.
2

Relational Algebra Operations
❑5 basic operations in relational algebra: 
1.Selection, 
2.Projection, 
3.Cartesian Product, 
4.Union, 
5.Set Difference .
❑In addition, Join, Intersection , and Division operations can 
be expressed in terms of the five basic operations.
❑These perform most of the data retrieval operations when 
needed.
3

Relational Algebra Operations -Pictorial 
representation
4
Refer: Fig 5.1, Page: 161

Relational Algebra Operations -
Pictorial representation (contd…)
5
Refer: Fig 5.1, Page: 161

Relational Algebra -notations used
6

Selection (or Restriction)
◼predicate (R)
❑Works on a single relation R and defines a relation that 
contains only those tuples (rows) of R that satisfy the specified 
condition ( predicate ).
Eg:List all staff with a salary greater than £10,000.
salary > 10000 (Staff)
Refer: Fig 5.2, Page: 162
7

Projection
◼col1, . . . , coln(R)
❑Works on a single relation R and defines a relation that 
contains a vertical subset of R, extracting the values of 
specified attributes and eliminating duplicates.
Eg:Produce a list of salaries for all staff, showing only  
staffNo , fName , lName , and salary details.
staffNo , fName , lName , salary (Staff)
Refer: Fig 5.3, Page: 162
8

Union
◼R S
❑Union of two relations R and S defines a relation that contains all the 
tuples of R, or S, or both R and S, duplicate tuples being eliminated. 
❑R and S must be union -compatible.
◼If R and S have Iand Jtuples, respectively, union is obtained by 
concatenating them into one relation with a maximum of ( I+ J) tuples .
Eg:List all cities where there is either a branch office or a 
property for rent.
city(Branch) city(PropertyForRent )
Refer: Fig 5.4, Page: 163
9

Set Difference/Minus
◼R –S
❑Defines a relation consisting of the tuples that are in relation 
R, but not in S. 
❑R and S must be union -compatible.
Eg:List all cities where there is a branch office but no properties 
for rent.
city(Branch) –city(PropertyForRent )
Refer: Fig 5.5, Page: 163
10

Intersection
◼R S
❑Defines a relation consisting of the set of all tuples that are in 
both R and S. 
❑R and S must be union -compatible.
◼Expressed using basic operations :
R S = R –(R –S)
Eg:List all cities where there is both a branch office and at least one 
property for rent.
city(Branch) city(PropertyForRent )
Refer: Fig 5.6, Page: 164
11

Cartesian product
◼R X S
❑Defines a relation that is the concatenation of every tuple of 
relation R with every tuple of relation S.
Eg:List the names and comments of all clients who have viewed a 
property for rent.
Step 1:
(clientNo , fName , lName (Client)) 
X (clientNo , propertyNo,comment (Viewing))
Refer: Fig 5.7, Page: 165
12

Example -Cartesian Product and Selection 
(contd..)
◼Step 2: Use selection operation to extract those tuples where 
Client.clientNo = Viewing.clientNo .
Client .clientN o =viewing. clientN o((clientNo ,fName,l Name(Client )) 
(clientN o,propertyN o,comment (Viewing)))
▪Cartesian product andSelection canbereduced toasingle operation
called aJoin.Refer: Fig 5.8, Page: 165
13

Join Operations
◼Join is a derivative of Cartesian product.
◼Equivalent to performing a Selection, using join predicate as 
selection formula, over Cartesian product of the two operand 
relations. 
◼Various forms of join operation
❑Theta join
❑Equijoin (a particular type of Theta join)
❑Natural join
❑Outer join
❑Semijoin
14
Theta join(-join)
◼R       FS
❑Defines a relation that contains tuples satisfying the 
predicate Ffrom the Cartesian product of R and S. 
❑The predicate Fis of the form R.a iS.biwhere may be 
one of the comparison operators (<, , >, , =, ).
◼We can rewrite Theta join using basic Selection and Cartesian 
product operations.
R      FS = F(R S)
◼If predicate Fcontains only equality (=), the term Equijoin is 
used. 
15
Example -Equijoin
◼List the names and comments of all clients who 
have viewed a property for rent.
(clientNo,fName,lName (Client))      Client.clientNo = Viewing.clientNo
(clientNo,propertyNo,comment (Viewing))
Refer: Fig 5.8, Page: 165
16
Natural Join
◼R     S
❑An Equijoin of the two relations R and S over all common 
attributes x. One occurrence of each common attribute is 
eliminated from the result.
Eg: List the names and comments of all clients who have viewed a 
property for rent.
(clientNo,fName,lName (Client))      (clientNo,propertyNo,comment (Viewing))
Refer: Fig 5.9, Page: 167
17

Outer join
◼To display rows in the result that do not have matching values in 
the join column, use Outer join .
◼Left (natural) Outer join as it keeps every tuple in the left -hand 
relation in the result. Similarly, there is a Right Outer join that 
keeps every tuple in the right -hand relation in the result. There is 
also a Full Outer join that keeps all tuples in both relations, 
padding tuples with nulls when no matching tuples are found.
◼They can be categorized into left,right, and fullouter joins. Join 
types:
❑JOIN = "normal" join = inner join. R ⋈S
❑LEFT OUTER JOIN = left outer join. R       S
❑RIGHT OUTER JOIN = right outer join. R       S
❑FULL OUTER JOIN = full outer join. R       S
18
Example -Left Outer join
◼Produce a status report on property viewings.
propertyNo,street,city (PropertyForRent )        Viewing
Refer: Fig 5.10, Page: 168
19

Example -Left Outer join
20

Example -Right Outer join
21
◼Includes those rows offirst (left) table
unmatched with rows from second
(right) table
◼Right Outer joinincludes those rows of
second (right) table that areunmatched
with rows from first(left) table.
◼Columns from second table arefilled
with NULLs .

Example : Full Outer Join
22
◼Includes rows that areunmatched in
both tables
◼Unmatched columns arefilled with
NULLs

Semijoin
◼R     FS
❑Defines a relation that contains the tuples of R that participate in 
the join of R with S.
❑Can rewrite Semijoin using Projection and Join:
R     FS= A(R      FS)
Eg:List complete details of all staff who work at the branch in 
Glasgow.
Staff     Staff.brancNo = Branch.branchNo and branch.city = ‘Glasgow’ Branch
Refer: Fig 5.11, Page: 169
23
Division
◼R S
❑Defines a relation over the attributes C that consists of set of tuples
from R that match combination of everytuple in S.
Eg: Identify all clients who have viewed all properties with three 
rooms.
(clientNo,propertyNo (Viewing)) (propertyNo (rooms = 3 (PropertyForRent )))
Refer: Fig 5.12, Page: 170
24
Use the schema diagram for the COMPANY relational database to 
answer the questions that follow:
Employee ( fname , minit , lname , ssn,bdate , address, sex, salary, superssn , dno)
Department ( dname , dnumber , mgrssn , mgrstartdate )
Dept_locations (dnumber , dlocation )
Project ( pname , pnumber , plocation , dnum )
Works_On (essn, pno, hours)
Dependent ( essn, dependent_name , sex, bdate , relationship)
1.Find employees whose department is 4. Ans: dno=4(Employee)
2.Find employees whose salary is greater than $30000.                          
Ans: salary>30000 (Employee)
3.Find employees who either work in department 4 and make over $25000 
per year, or work in department 5 and make over $30000.                   
Ans: (dno=4salary>25000) (dno=5salary>30000) Employee
25
4.List each employee’s first and last name and salary.                            
Ans: Пfname , lname , salary(Employee)
5.List the first name, last name and salary of all employees who work in 
department number 5. Ans: Пfname , lname , salary σ(dno= 5)(Employee)
6.List the name and address of all employees who work for the ‘Research’ 
department. Ans: Пfname , lname , address (σdname = ‘Research’ (Department )      
dnumber = dno(Employee)) 
7.For every project located in ‘Stafford’, list the project number, the 
controlling department number, and the department manager’s last 
name, address and birth date. . Ans: Пpnumber , dnum , lname , address, bdate(σplocation = 
‘Stafford’ (Project)      dnum = dnumber (Department ) mgrssn = ssn(Employee ))
26
27Computing a Join (Advanced SQL Joins)
Procedure forgenerating results ofajoinare:
1.Form Cartesian product ofthetables named inFROM clause .
2.Ifthere isaWHERE clause, apply thesearch condition toeach row
oftheproduct table, retaining those rows thatsatisfy thecondition .
3.Foreach remaining row, determine value ofeach item inSELECT list
toproduce asingle rowinresult table.
4.IfDISTINCT hasbeen specified, eliminate anyduplicate rows from
theresult table.
5.Ifthere isanORDER BYclause, sortresult table asrequired .

The End Of Lecture 7
Thank You
28
