UCCD2203 Database Systems
Lecture 3
By 
Mr. Cheang Kah Wai, Alvin
Department of Information Systems, FICT
Lecture 3 Topic: Database Design 
Methodology -Part 1
◼Introduction to Database Design 
Methodology
◼Conceptual Database Design
◼Logical Database Design
2
Database Design
◼A database is usually a fundamental 
component of the information system, 
especially in business -oriented systems. 
Thus, database design is part of system 
development .
3
Design Methodology
◼A structured approach that uses 
procedures, techniques, tools and 
documentation aids to support and 
facilitate the process of design.
◼A design methodology consists of phases 
each containing a number of steps that 
guide the designer in the techniques 
appropriate at each stage of the project.
4
Stages of Database System Development 
Life cycle
The following picture shows how 
database design is involved in the 
system development lifecycle.
5
Database Planning
The database planning includes the activities that allow the stages of the 
database system development lifecycle to be realized as efficiently and 
effectively as possible. This phase must be integrated with the overall 
Information System strategy of the organization.
The very first step in database planning is to define the mission statement 
and objectives for the database system. That is the definition of:
◼the major aims of the database system,
◼the purpose of the database system,
◼the supported tasks of the database system,
◼the resources of the database system.
6
Requirements Collection and Analysis
During the requirements collection and analysis 
phase , the collection and analysis of the information 
about the part of the enterprise to be served by the 
database are completed. The results may include, e.g.:
◼the description of the data used or generated
◼the details how the data is to be used or generated
◼any additional requirements for the new database 
system
7
Database Management System Selection
◼This in an optional phase. When there is a need for a 
new database management system (DBMS), this phase 
is done. DBMS means a database system like Access, 
SQL Server, MySQL, Oracle.
◼In this phase the criteria for the new DBMS are 
defined. Then several products are evaluated according 
to the criteria. Finally, the recommendation for the 
selection is decided.
8
Application Design
◼In the application design phase , the design of the 
user interface and the application programs that use 
and process the database are defined and designed.
9
Prototyping
◼The purpose of  a prototype is to allow the users to use the 
prototype to identify the features of  the system using the 
computer.
◼There are horizontal and vertical prototypes. A horizontal 
prototype has many features (e.g. user interfaces) but they are not 
working. A vertical prototype has very few features but they are 
working. See the following picture.
10
Implementation
◼During the implementation phase , the physical 
realization of the database and application designs are 
to be done. This is the programming phase of the 
systems development.
11
Data Conversion and Loading
◼This phase is needed when a new database is replacing an old 
system. During this phase the existing data will be transferred 
into the new database.
12
Testing
◼Before the new system is going to live, it should be 
thoroughly tested. The goal of testing is to find errors! 
The goal is not to prove the software is working well.
13
Operational Maintenance
◼The operational maintenance is the process of  monitoring
and maintaining the database system.
◼Monitoring means that the performance of  the system is 
observed. If  the performance of  the system falls below an 
acceptable level, tuning or reorganization of  the database may be 
required.
◼Maintaining and upgrading the database system means that, 
when new requirements arise, the new development lifecycle will 
be done.
14
Database Design -Phases
The database design phase is divided into three steps:
1.conceptual database design
2.logical database design
3.physical database design
◼In the conceptual database design phase, the model of the data to be used 
independent of all physical considerations is to be constructed. The model is 
based on the requirements specification of the system.
◼In the logical database design phase, the model of the data to be used is based 
on a specific data model, but independent of a particular database management 
system is constructed. This is based on the target data model for the database, e.g. 
relational data model.
◼In the physical database design phase, the description of the implementation of 
the database on secondary storage is created. The base relations, indexes, integrity 
constraints, security, etc. are defined using the SQL language.
15
Database Design Methodology –Overview
◼Step 1   Build conceptual data  model
Step 1.1  Identify entity types.
Step 1.2  Identify relationship types.
Step 1.3  Identify and associate attributes with entity or relationship types.
Step 1.4  Determine attribute domains.
Step 1.5  Determine candidate, primary & alternate key attributes.
Step 1.6  Consider use of enhanced modeling concepts. (optional step)
Step 1.7  Check model for redundancy .
Step 1.8  Validate conceptual model against user transactions .
Step 1.9  Review conceptual data model with user.
Conceptual Database Design
16
◼Step 2   Build logical data model
Step 2.1  Derive relations for local logical data model.
Step 2.2  Validate relations using normalization.
Step 2.3  Validate relations against user transactions.
Step 2.4  Check integrity constraints.
Step 2.5  Review logical data model with user.
Step 2.6  Merge logical data models into global 
model.(optional step)
Step 2.7  Check for future growth
Database Design Methodology –Overview
Logical Database Design for the Relational Model
17
◼Step 3  Translate logical data model for target DBMS
Step 3.1  Design base relations.
Step 3.2  Design representation of derived data.
Step 3.3  Design general constraints.
◼Step 4  Design file organizations and indexes
Step 4.1  Analyze transactions.
Step 4.2  Choose file organization.
Step 4.3  Choose indexes.
Step 4.4  Estimate disk space requirements .
Database Design Methodology –Overview
Physical Database Design for the Relational Databases
18
◼Step 5  Design user views.
◼Step 6  Design security mechanisms .
◼Step 7  Consider the introduction of controlled 
redundancy.
◼Step 8  Monitor and tune the operational system.
Database Design Methodology –Overview
Physical Database Design for the Relational Databases
19
CONCEPTUAL DATABASE 
DESIGN
20
Step 1: Build Conceptual Data Model
Objective -To build  one or more conceptual data model 
of the data requirements of the enterprise.
This objective could be achieved by following these activities:
◼Step 1.1  Identify entity types.
◼Step 1.2  Identify relationship types.
◼Step 1.3  Identify and associate attributes with entity or relationship 
types.
◼Step 1.4  Determine attribute domains.
◼Step 1.5  Determine candidate, primary & alternate key attributes.
◼Step 1.6  Consider use of enhanced modeling concepts. (optional step)
◼Step 1.7  Check model for redundancy.
◼Step 1.8  Validate conceptual model against user transactions.
◼Step 1.9  Review conceptual data model with user.
21
Document the entity type
Extract from the data dictionary for the StaffClient user views 
of DreamHome ,showing a description of entities
Refer:  Chapter 16, Figure 16.1,Page:472
22
ER diagram for the StaffClient user views of DreamHome
Refer:  Chapter 16, Figure 16.2,Page:474
23
Document the Relationship type
Extract from the data dictionary for StaffClient user views of 
DreamHome ,showing description of relationships.
Refer:  Chapter 16, Figure 16.3,Page:475
24
Document attributes
Extract from the data dictionary for StaffClient user views of 
DreamHome ,showing description of attributes.
Refer:  Chapter 16, Figure 16.4,Page:478
25
ER diagram for the StaffClient user views of DreamHome
with primary keys added
26
ER diagram for the StaffClient user views of DreamHome
with specialization/generalization added
27
Describing User Transactions
a)List the details of staff supervised by a named supervisor at the branch.
b)List details of all assistants alphabetically by name at the branch.
c)List the details of property(including the rental deposit) available for rent at the branch, along 
with the owner’s details.
d)List the details of properties managed by a named member of staff at the branch.
e)List the clients registering at the branch and the names of the members of staff who registered the 
clients.
f)Identify properties located in Glasgow with rents no higher than £450.
g)Identify the name and telephone number of an owner of a given property.
h)List the details of comments made by clients viewing a given property.
i)Display the names and phone numbers of clients who have viewed a given property but not 
supplied comments.
j)Display the details of a lease between a named client and a given property.
k)Identify the leases due to expire next month at the branch.
l)List the details of properties that have not been rented out for more than three months.
m)Produce a list of clients whose preferences match a particular property.
28
LOGICAL DATABASE DESIGN
29
Objective :Totranslate theconceptual data model into alogical
data model, and then tovalidate this model toensure itis
structurally correct (using thetechnique ofnormalization) and
toensure itsupports therequired transactions .
This objective could be achieved by following these activities:
❑Step 2.1  Derive relations for local logical data model.
❑Step 2.2  Validate relations using normalization.
❑Step 2.3  Validate relations against user transactions.
❑Step 2.4  Check integrity constraints.
❑Step 2.5  Review logical data model with user.
❑Step 2.6  Merge logical data models into global model.(optional step)
❑Step 2.7  Check for future growth
Step 2: Build Logical Data Model
30
Conceptual data model for StaffClient user views showing 
all attributes
31
Step 2.1: Derive relations for logical data model
Objective: To create relations for logical data model to represent 
entities, relationships, and attributes that have been identified.
◼To describe how relations are derived for the following structures that 
may occur in a conceptual data model :
1)Strong entity types;
2)Weak entity types;
3)One-to-many (1:*) binary relationship types;
4)One-to-one (1:1) binary relationship types;
5)One-to-one (1:1) recursive relationship types ;
6)Superclass /subclass relationship types;
7)Many -to-many (*.*) binary relationship types;
8)Complex relationship types;
9)Multi -valued attributes.
Step 2: Build Logical Data Model
32
Step 2.1: Derive relations for logical data model
(1)Strong entity types:
For each strong entity in the data model,
❑Create a relation that includes all simple attributes of 
that entity. 
❑For composite attributes, include only constituent 
simple attributes .
Staff (staffNo , fName , lName , position, sex, DOB)
Primary Key staffNo
33
Step 2.1:  Derive relations for logical data model
(2) Weak entity types:
For each weak entity in the data model,
❑Create a relation that includes all simple attributes of 
that entity. 
❑Primary key is partially or fully derived from each 
owner entity .
Preference (prefType , maxRent )
Primary Key None (at present)
34
Strong entity type called Client and weak entity 
type called Preference
35
Step 2.1:  Derive relations for logical data model
(3) one-to many (1:*) binary relationship types :
For each 1:* binary relationship,
❑Entity on ‘one side’ is designated as the parent entity and 
entity on ‘many side’ is designated as the child entity.
❑Post a copy of the primary key attribute(s) of parent entity 
into relation representing child entity, to act as a foreign key.
36
Step 2.1:  Derive relations for logical data model
(4) One -to-one (1:1) binary relationship types:
Creating relations to represent 1:1 relationship is slightly more 
complex,
❑Cardinality cannot be used to identify parent and child entities 
in a relationship. 
❑Instead, participation are used to decide whether to  combine 
entities into one relation or to create two relations and post a 
copy of primary key from one relation to the other. Consider 
the following:
(a) mandatory participation on both sides of 1:1 relationship;
(b) mandatory participation on oneside of 1:1 relationship;
(c) optional participation on bothsides of 1:1 relationship.
37
Cardinality and Participation (re -visit)
•Cardinality describes the number of  possible relationships for each participating entity. 
•Participation determines whether all or only some entity occurrences participate in a 
relationship. 
•The cardinality of  a binary relationship is what we have been referring to as one -to-one, 
one-to-many, and many -to-many. 
•A participation constraint represents whether all entity occurrences are involved in a 
particular relationship ( mandatory participation ) or only some ( optional participation ). 
•The cardinality and participation constraints for the Staff Manages Branch relationship are 
shown below.
38
Step 2.1: Derive relations for logical data model
(a) Mandatory participation on bothsides of 
1:1 relationship
❑Combine entities involved into one 
relation 
❑choose one of the primary keys of original 
entities to be primary key of new relation
❑other (if one exists) is used as an alternate 
key.
Client (clientNo , fName , lName , telNo , prefType ,
maxRent , staffNo )
Primary Key : clientNo
Foreign Key : staffNo references Staff( staffNo )
39
Step 2.1:  Derive relations for logical data model
(b) Mandatory participation on one side ofa1:1
relationship :
Inthiscase, weareableto,
❑Identify parent and child entities using participation constraints. 
❑Entity with optional participation is designated parent entity, and 
entity with mandatory participation is designated child entity. 
❑Copy of primary key of parent entity is placed in relation 
representing child entity. 
❑If relationship has one or more attributes, these attributes should 
follow the posting of the primary key to the child relation. 
40
Step 2.1:  Derive relations for logical data model
(c) Optional participation on bothsides of a 1:1 relationship:
In this case,
❑Designation of the parent and child entities is arbitrary unless 
can find out more about the relationship.
◼Consider 1:1 Staff UsesCar relationship with optional 
participation on both sides. Assume majority of cars, but not all, 
are used by staff and only minority of staff use cars. 
◼Car entity, although optional, is closer to being mandatory than 
Staff entity. Therefore designate Staff as parent entity and Car as 
child entity.
41
Step 2.1:  Derive relations for logical data model
(5) 1:1 recursive relationships -follow rules for participation 
for a 1:1 relationship:
❑mandatory participation onboth sides :single relation with two
copies oftheprimary key.
❑One copy =>primary key;other copy =>foreign key,should be
renamed
❑mandatory participation ononly oneside:
◼option tocreate asingle relation with two copies ofthe
primary key,or
◼create anew relation torepresent therelationship .The new
relation would only have two attributes, both copies ofthe
primary key.
❑optional participation onboth sides, create anew relation as
described above .
42
Step 2.1:  Derive relations for logical data model
(6) Superclass/subclass relationship types:
❑Identify superclass as parent entity and subclass entity as 
child entity. 
❑There are various options on how to represent such a 
relationship as one or more relations. 
❑Most appropriate option dependent on number of factors 
such as:
◼disjointness and participation constraints on the 
superclass /subclass relationship, 
◼whether subclasses are involved in distinct relationships,  
◼number of participants in  superclass /subclass relationship.
43
Step 2.1:  Derive relations for logical data model
(7) *:* binary relationship types
❑Create relation to represent relationship and include any 
attributes that are part of relationship.
❑Post a copy of the primary key attribute(s) of the entities 
that participate in relationship into new relation, to act as 
foreign keys. 
❑These foreign keys will also form primary key of new 
relation, possibly in combination with some of the 
attributes of the relationship. 
44
Step 2.1:  Derive relations for logical data model
(7) *:* binary relationship types -Example
45
Step 2.1:  Derive relations for logical data model
(8) Complex relationship types
❑Create relation to represent relationship and include any 
attributes that are part of the relationship. 
❑Post copy of primary key attribute(s) of entities that 
participate in the complex relationship into new relation, 
to act as foreign keys. 
❑Any foreign keys that represent a ‘many’ relationship (for 
example, 1..*, 0..*) generally will also form the primary key 
of new relation, possibly in combination with some of the 
attributes of the relationship.
46
Step 2.1:  Derive relations for logical data model
(8) Complex relationship types -Example
47
Step 2.1:  Derive relations for logical data model
(9) Multi -valued attributes
❑Create new relation to represent multi -valued attribute and 
include primary key of entity in new relation, to act as a foreign 
key. 
❑Unless the multi -valued attribute is itself an alternate key of the 
entity, primary key of new relation is combination of the multi -
valued attribute and the primary key of the entity.
48
Relations for the Staff view of DreamHome
49
Relations that represent the global logical data model for DreamHome
50
Global relation diagram for DreamHome
51
The End 
Thank You
52
