UCCD2303 DATABASE TECHNOLOGY / 
UCCD2203 DATABASE SYSTEMS
Lecture 11
Data Management and Databases Engines 
Part 2
by
Mr. Cheang Kah Wai
Department of Information Systems, FICT
Lecture 11 Topic: Data Management 
and Databases Engines -Part 2
◼Emerging Trends of Database Engines
◼Concept and Characteristics of NoSQL 
Databases
◼Data Modelling for NoSQL Databases

Emerging Trends ofDatabase Engines
◼Three major eras in database
technology :
❑Pre-Relational (1950-1972)
❑Relational (1972-2000)
❑TheNext Generation (2000 onwards)

Emerging Trends ofDatabase Engines
◼Pre-Relational (1950 -1972 )
❑Magnetic Tape
❑Magnetic Disk
❑Indexed Sequential Access Method (ISAM)
❑Hierarchical Model
❑Information Management System (IMS)
❑Network Model
❑Integrated Database Management System (IDMS)

Emerging Trends ofDatabase Engines
◼Relational (1972-2000)
❑Codd’s Paper
❑System R
❑Oracle
❑Commerical Ingres
❑Informix
❑DB2
❑Sybase
❑Postgres
❑SQL Server
❑MySQL

Emerging Trends ofDatabase Engines
◼TheNext Generation (2000 onwards)
❑MapReduce
❑Hadoop
❑Vertica
❑Dynamo
❑Cassandra
❑Hbase
❑NuoDB
❑MongoDB
❑VoltDB
❑Areospike
❑Splice Machine

TheFirst Database Revolution
◼The database was created to try and solve 
the limitations of traditional paper -based 
information storage. 
◼In databases, the files are called records 
and the individual data elements in a record 
are called fields.
❑Example: name, phone number, date of birth
◼The way these elements are stored has 
evolved since the early days of databases.

TheFirst Database Revolution
◼The earliest systems were called the 
hierarchical and network models. 
Thehierarchical model organised data in 
a tree -like structure. 
❑IBM developed this model in the 1960s.
◼The hierarchical model represents data as 
records which are connected with links. 
Each record has a parent record, starting 
with the root record. 

TheFirst Database Revolution

TheFirst Database Revolution
◼Hierarchical model is still used today. 
❑Used by Microsoft in the Windows Registry and 
in file systems, and they can have advantages 
over more modern database models (speed 
and simplicity). 
◼Disadvantages of Hierarchical model:
❑Cannot easily represent relationships between 
types of data. 
❑Can be achieved through quite complex 
methods but the database designer has to be 
an expert that understands the fundamental 
workings of these systems.

TheFirst Database Revolution
◼Advantages of Hierarchical model:
❑The hierarchical database was a good 
replacement for paper -based system. 
❑Records could be accessed almost 
instantaneously. 
❑Full backup and recovery mechanism -which 
means the lost files can be recovered.

TheFirst Database Revolution
◼In 1969, scientists at the Conference on 
Data Systems Languages (CODASYL) 
released network model . 
❑The next significant innovation in databases. 
❑It overcame the restrictions of the hierarchical 
model. 
◼This model allows relationships, and it has 
a “schema” (a diagrammatic representation 
of the relationships).

TheFirst Database Revolution

TheFirst Database Revolution
◼The main difference between the
hierarchical model and thenetwork model
isthat the network model allows each
record tohave more than one parent and
child record .
◼The “Client”, “Supervisor” andother boxes
represent what indatabase terminology are
called entities .

TheFirst Database Revolution
◼The network model allows entities tohave
relationships, justlikeinreallife.
❑Intheexample, anorder involves acustomer,
supervisor andworker —ifaclient walked into
astore andbought aproduct .
◼The network model didimprove onthe
hierarchical model, butitdidnotbecome
dominant .
❑IBM continued tousethehierarchical model in
their more established products (IMS andDL/l)
❑Researchers came upwith the relational
model .

TheSecond Database Revolution
◼The relational model was much easier for
designers to understand and the
programming interface wasbetter .
◼The network andhierarchical models were
used throughout the 1960 sand 70s
because they offered better performance .

TheSecond Database Revolution

TheSecond Database Revolution
◼The mainframe computer systems used in
the 60sand 70sneeded the fastest
possible solutions because thehardware
wasextremely limited .
◼However, the 1980 ssaw tremendous
advances incomputing technology andthe
relational model started tobecome the
most popular .

TheSecond Database Revolution

TheSecond Database Revolution
◼The relational model was, like the network 
model. 
◼The relational model describes the data in 
a database as being stored in tables , each 
containing records with fields. 
❑Customer: customer id, first name, last name, 
street address, mobile

TheSecond Database Revolution
◼The type of data for each field is 
predetermined 
❑Example: text, number, date 
◼These tables can have relationships in a 
relational database, and different types of 
relationships exist. 
❑One-to-One
❑One-to-Many
❑Many -to-Many

TheSecond Database Revolution
◼These allow the designer to show how one 
table relates to one another.
❑Allows the database designer to ensure the 
database will work well when applications 
access it and helps with troubleshooting 
problems.
❑Helps to maintain the integrity of a database. 
◼For example, if a product has to be associated with a 
manufacturer to exist in a database, then a rule can 
exist that only allows the addition of products if they 
have an associated manufacturer. 

TheSecond Database Revolution
◼Most relational databases use a standard 
Structured Query Language (SQL). 
❑SQL allows an application to gain access to the 
data needed by a user. 
❑It can either retrieve all the data from a table (or 
even a database) or just one individual field, 
determined by a set of criteria. 
◼For example, an application may only require the 
name of a professor associated with a particular 
course.

TheSecond Database Revolution
◼The main advantage of the relational model 
is that it provides consistency in the data.
◼The model implements a set 
ofconstraints and these ensure that the 
database functions as intended. 
❑developed through studying the environment in 
which the database operates.

TheSecond Database Revolution
◼The real -world relationships between the 
entities have to be determined so that the 
database functions correctly. 
❑study the previous paper -based record systems 
and interviewing employees and suppliers in an 
organisation .
❑a strict and thorough requirement analysis 
before a database can be populated and used. 
❑ensures that a system will not be able to do 
anything that would cause errors or incorrectly 
represent the real -world situation of the data.

TheThird Database Revolution
◼Before the third revolution, all the 
databases have used the Structured Query 
Language (SQL) as the main way to 
retrieve and store data in a database. 
◼Around 2000, a new term was coined, 
namely NoSQL. 
❑It refers to “not only SQL” databases that use 
other query languages to store and retrieve 
data. 

TheThird Database Revolution
◼These types of databases have existed 
since the 1960s, but it was the Web 2.0 
revolution that made them come to the 
attention of the technology world.
◼Web 1.0: the first iteration of the Internet 
when users received and ingested content 
created by webmasters and their teams. 

TheThird Database Revolution
◼Web 2.0: the shift to user -generated 
content and a more user -friendly internet 
for everyone. 
❑Youtube and social media epitomise this phase 
of the Internet. 
❑For databases, it meant the needs of 
developers and administrators had changed.
❑There was a vast amount of data being added 
to the Internet by users every second. 
❑Cloud computing unlocked massive storage 
and processing capabilities and the way we use 
databases changed.

TheThird Database Revolution
◼Relational databases continued to have 
their place, despite the shift away from 
them in the online world. 
◼Businesses still needed the reliability, 
consistency and ease of programming for 
their business systems.

Examples of SQL databases
oDb2
oMySQL
oPostgreSQL
oYugabyteDB
oCockroachDB
oOracle Database
oMicrosoft SQL Server
oAzure SQL Database
Database Transaction Models 
(SQL vs NoSQL)
◼SQL database transaction properties:
ACID (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and 
Durability)
◼NoSQL database transaction  
properties: 
BASE (Basically Available, Soft State, Eventual 
consistency )
SQL Database Transaction Model -ACID
◼ACID Properties
❑Atomicity
◼'Allornothing' property .
❑Consistency
◼Must transform database from one consistent state to
another (data integrity) .
❑Isolation
◼Partial effects of incomplete transactions should not be 
visible to other transactions.
❑Durability
◼Effects of a committed transaction are permanent and must 
not be lost because of  later failure.

NoSQL Database
❑A broad array of nonrelational database 
technologies that have developed to address the 
challenges represented by Big Data.
❑Non-tabular, and data is stored differently than 
relational tables. 
❑NoSQL provide flexible schemas and scale easily 
with large amounts of data and high user loads.
❑Example: MongoDB, CouchDB, CouchBase , 
Cassandra, HBase, Redis, Riak, Neo4J

NoSQL Database Transaction Model -BASE
◼Basically Available: 
❑The system is guaranteed to be available in event of failure.
◼Soft State: 
❑The state of the data could change without application 
interactions due to eventual consistency.
◼Eventual Consistency: 
❑The system will be eventually consistent after the application 
input. 
❑The data will be replicated to different nodes and will eventually 
reach a consistent state. 
❑But the consistency is not guaranteed at a transaction level.
NoSQL Database
◼NoSQL databases have the following properties:
•They have higher scalability.
•They use distributed computing.
•They are cost effective.
•They support flexible schema.
•They can process both unstructured and semi -
structured data.
•There are no complex relationships, such as the 
ones between tables in an RDBMS.
NoSQL Database
◼In this age of technology, the requirements 
shifted towards simplicity regarding design 
and scalability due to the vastly growing 
nature of the new Internet. 
❑24/7 availability and speed became of utmost 
importance. 
❑Traditional relational databases struggled 
particularly with the scalability and speed 
required, and due to NoSQL using different 
data structures, it was generally faster. 
❑They were also viewed as being more flexible 
because they did not have the same constraints 
as traditional relational databases.

NoSQL Database
◼Disadvantages of NoSQL:
❑not able to use joins across tables 
❑a lack of standardisation
◼For the new generation of web developers, 
NoSQL was better. 
❑Massive innovations took place in the first two 
decades of the 21st century, because website 
and development was made much easier and it 
could cope with the growing nature of the World 
Wide Web. 

NoSQL Database
◼Big Data
❑In 1960’s, the scientists have had to analyse
particles that collide at 600 million times per 
second. These analyses are done using a 
countless number of rapidly taken photos, and 
this involves a massive amount of storage and 
sophisticated algorithms. 
❑It was these scientists who first started 
analysing what we now call big data. 

NoSQL Database
❑Big Data has 5 characteristics: 
◼Volume -refers to the amount/quantity of data (i.e. a 
high volume),
◼Variety -refers to the variations in the structure of 
the data to be stored, 
◼Velocity -refers to the rapid rate or speed at which 
the data is entering the system.
◼Veracity -refers to the data's trustworthiness, 
encompassing data quality, noise and anomaly 
detection issues. 
◼Value -Unlocking and transforming massive raw data 
sets data into actionable insights that offer tangible 
value by using Advanced Analytics, Machine Learning 
and Artificial Intelligence.

NoSQL Database
◼Big Data
❑Big Data is a collection of data that is huge in 
volume yet growing exponentially with time. 
❑It is a data with very large size and complexity 
that none of traditional data management tools 
can store it or process it efficiently. 
❑Big data is also a data but with huge size.
❑Google was one of the first companies to be 
confronted with the problem of dealing with a 
vast amount of data.

NoSQL Database
◼Big Data
❑Following are some examples for Big Data:
◼The New York Stock Exchange is an example of Big 
Data that generates about one terabyte of new trade 
data per day.
◼The statistic shows that 500+ terabytes of new data 
get ingested into the databases of social media site 
Facebook , every day. 
❑This data is mainly generated in terms of photo and 
video uploads, message exchanges, putting comments 
etc.
◼A single Jet engine can generate 10+ terabytes of 
data in 30 minutes of flight time. With many thousand 
flights per day, generation of data reaches up to 
many Petabytes .

NoSQL Database
◼Big Data
❑Big Data requires a different approach to 
distributed data storage that is designed for 
large -scale clusters. 
❑Hadoop has become the de facto standard for 
most Big Data storage and processing. 
❑Hadoop is widely used by organisations tapping 
into the potential of analysing extremely large 
data sets. 

NoSQL Database
◼Hadoop
❑Hadoop is Java based framework used for storing 
and processing big data. 
◼It is an ecosystem of open -source components that 
fundamentally changes the way enterprises store, 
process, and analyze data. 
❑The data is stored on inexpensive commodity 
servers that run as clusters. 
❑Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS) enables 
concurrent processing and fault tolerance. 
NoSQL Database
◼Hadoop Ecosystem
❑Hadoop is a very low -level tool requiring 
considerable effort to create, manage, and use, it 
presents quite a few obstacles. 
❑As a result, a host of related applications have 
grown up around Hadoop to attempt to make it 
easier to use and more accessible to users who 
are not skilled at complex Java programming.
❑Most organisations that use Hadoop also use a 
set of other related products that interact and 
complement each other to produce an entire 
ecosystem of applications and tools. 
NoSQL Database
◼Hadoop Ecosystem
 Hadoop 
Ecosystem
Data Modelling for NoSQL Databases
◼Models of NoSQL 
❑also called as data structures of NoSQL or types 
of NoSQL Database

Data Modelling for NoSQL Databases
◼Key-Value (KV) Databases
❑Simplest of the NoSQL data models.
❑It stores data as a collection of key -value pairs.
❑The key acts as an identifier for the value.
❑The value can be anything such as text, an XML 
document, or an image.
❑Does not attempt to understand the contents of 
the value component –it simply stores.
❑KV pairs are organized into “buckets” (bucket is 
equivalent to table)

Data Modelling for NoSQL Databases
◼Key-Value (KV) Databases

Data Modelling for NoSQL Databases
◼Document -Based Databases
❑Similar to KV databases, can be considered a sub -
type of KV databases.
❑A NoSQL database that stores data in tagged 
documents in KV pairs.
❑Unlike a KV database where the value component can 
contain any type of data, a document database always 
store a document in the value component.
❑The document can be in any encoded format, such as 
XML, JSON (JavaScript Object Notation), or BSON 
(Binary JSON).
❑Document database do attempt to understand the 
content of the value component, unlike KV database.

Data Modelling for NoSQL Databases
◼Document -Based Databases

Data Modelling for NoSQL Databases
◼Column -Based Databases
❑A NoSQL database that organizes data in key -value 
pairs with keys mapped to a set of columns in the 
value component.
❑Column -centric storage –A physical data storage 
technique in which data is stored in blocks, which hold 
data from a single column across many rows.
❑Row-centric storage –A physical data storage 
technique in which data is stored in blocks, which hold 
data from all column of a given set of rows.

Data Modelling for NoSQL Databases
◼Column -Based Databases

Data Modelling for NoSQL Databases
◼Column -Based Databases
❑Relational database presents data in logical tables; 
however, the data is actually stored in data blocks 
containing rows of data
❑Row-centric storage minimizes the number of disk 
reads necessary to retrieve a row of data.
❑However, in queries that retrieve a small set of 
columns across a large set of rows, a large number of 
disk accesses are required.
◼Example: a query that wants to retrieve only the city and state 
of every customer will have to access every data block that 
contains a customer row to retrieve that data. In the previous 
figure: accessing five data blocks to get the city and state of 
every customer.

Data Modelling for NoSQL Databases
◼Column -Based Databases
❑A column -based database stores the data in blocks by 
column instead of by row.
❑A single customer’s data will be spread across several 
blocks, but all of the data from single column will be in 
just a few blocks.
◼Query about city and state –only 2 blocks
❑A column family database (column -based) is a NoSQL 
database that organizes data in key -value pairs with 
keys mapped to a set of columns in the value 
component.
◼In a column family database, a collection of columns or super 
columns related to a collection of rows.

Data Modelling for NoSQL Databases
◼Column -Based Databases

Data Modelling for NoSQL Databases
◼Graph -Based Databases
❑A NoSQL database based on graph theory to store 
data about relationship -rich environments as a 
collection of nodes and edges.
❑Interest in graph -based databases originated in the 
area of social networks, which include a wide range of 
applications –Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, dating 
websites, knowledge management, logistics and 
routing, master data management etc.

Data Modelling for NoSQL Databases
◼Graph -Based Databases
❑Node –the representation of a single entity instance.
❑Edge –the representation of a relationship between 
nodes.
❑Properties –the attributes or characteristics of a node 
or edge that are of interest to the users.
❑Traversal –a query in a graph database.

Data Modelling for NoSQL Databases
◼Graph -Based Databases

Examples of NoSQL databases
◼Redis
◼FaunaDB
◼CouchDB
◼MongoDB
◼Cassandra
◼Elasticsearch
◼BigTable
◼Neo4j
◼HBase
The End Of Lecture 11
Thank You

