UCCD2303 DATABASE TECHNOLOGY / 
UCCD2203 DATABASE SYSTEMS
Introduction to Data Modelling and Design  
Part 1
Lecture 1
By 
MrCheang Kah Wai, Alvin
Department of Information Systems, FICT

Lecture 1 Topic: Introduction to Data 
Modelling and Design –Part 1
◼Database Concepts
◼Database Architecture
◼Data Modelling Using the Entity 
Relationship (ER) Model

DATABASE CONCEPTS

Data Vs Information Vs Knowledge
◼Data : raw material, from which one can deduce 
new facts.
◼Information: processed data (Summarized, 
Organized, Labeled), meaningful to audience. 
◼Knowledge: Knowing what information is required 
and knowing what the information means.

Raw data 
Context
InformationList of dates when a holiday 
cottage has been booked.
1/1/15, 4/1/15
25/5/15, 1/6/15
5/10/15, 10/10/15 
4/12/15, 25/12/154/12/15, 1/6/15, 25/5/15, 
10/10/15, 25/12/15, 1/1/15,  
4/1/15, 5/10/15, 7/9/15
Processing

Limitations of  File -based Approach
◼Separation and isolation of data
◼Duplication of data
◼Data dependence
◼Incompatible file formats
◼Fixed Queries/Proliferation (increase ) of 
application programs

Database System vs. File System

Database
❑A shared collection of logically related 
data (raw facts) and a description of 
this data, designed to meet the 
information need of an organization .
❑Metadata (data about data)

End user data

Descriptions of  the properties or characteristics of  the data, 
including data types, field sizes, allowable values, and data 
context

Database Management Systems (DBMS)
❑A software system that enables users to define, 
create, maintain and control access to the 
database .
❑Collection of programs that manages database 
structure and controls access to data
❑Possible to share data among multiple applications 
or users
❑Makes data management more efficient and 
effective

Database Characteristics
◼Persistent
-Lasts a long time, outlives program that operate it.
-Relevance of intended usage: only store potentially relevant data
◼Inter -related
-Entity: cluster of data about a topic (course, student, loan)
-Relationship: connection among entities
◼Shared
-Multiple uses : hundreds to thousands of data entry screens and reports
-Multiple users : many people simultaneously use a database
◼Reliability
-up all the time 

Database Characteristics
◼Massive
-hundreds of gigabytes for medium size organization
◼Safe
-from system/software failure, from malicious users
◼Efficient
-retrieval, storing, etc
◼Convenient
-Simple commands to get the information

Database System Environment

Roles in the Database Environment
❑Data and Database administrator 
▪ Database administrator (DBA): More technical, DBMS specific skills
▪ Data administrator : Less technical, Planning role
❑Database Designers
▪ Logical Database Designer : concerned on identifying the data, its relationship 
and constraints, ways to store in database.
▪ Physical Database Designer : decides how the logical DB design is to be 
physically realized
❑Application Developers: Works from a specification provided by system 
analysts.
❑End-Users
▪ Naïve users : are typically unfamiliar with DBMS and 
▪ Sophisticated users :  are familiar with the structure and facilities of DBMS

Advantages of DBMS
◼Control of data redundancy
◼Data consistency
◼More information from the same 
amount of data.
◼Sharing of data
◼Improved data integrity (validity & 
consistency)
◼Improved security
◼Enforcement of standards
◼Economy of scale (cost saving, 
shared resources)
◼Balance of conflicting requirements
◼Improved data accessibility and 
responsiveness◼Increased productivity (reduced 
programming time)
◼Improved maintenance through data 
independence
◼Increased concurrency
◼Improved backup and recovery 
services

Disadvantages of DBMS
◼Complexity ( all functionalities make its design very 
complex as well as s/w )
◼Size ( complexity and many functions add to size, MBs 
storage and memory space required )
◼Cost of DBMSs
◼Additional hardware costs
◼Cost of conversion ( system, training, new staff hiring )
◼Performance ( may be slower in certain cases )
◼Greater impact of a failure( centralized resources, 
increased vulnerability )

Database :Arepository where anordered andintegrated collection
oftheenterprise data isstored forcomputer processing and
information sharing .
Database Management System (DBMS ):DBMS isasoftware
system that enables users todefine, create, maintain andcontrol
access tothedatabase .
Database System :The combination ofadatabase, adatabase
management system and adata model .Itisresponsible forthe
following data manipulation acts;data controlling, data retrieving,
datamaintenance anddatadefinition .Database Terminology

Database Terminology
Data Warehouse (DW) :Itisacollection ofmethods,
techniques, andtools used tosupport knowledge workers -
senior managers, directors, andanalysts toconduct data
analyses that help with performing decision -making
processes andimproving information resources .
Data Mining (DM) :Adata-driven approach toanalysis
andprediction byapplying sophisticated techniques and
algorithms todiscover knowledge .
Three -level ANSI -SPARC Architecture*
Refer: Fig 2.1, Page: 87* The American National Standards Institute (ANSI) -
Standards Planning and Requirements Committee (SPARC)

Objectives of  Three -Level Architecture
◼It allows independent customized user views
◼It hides the physical storage details from users
◼The database administrator should be able to 
change the database storage structures 
without affecting the users ’ views
◼The internal structure of the database should 
be unaffected by changes to the physical 
aspects of the storage

Three -level ANSI -SPARC Architecture
1.External Level
❑Users' view of the database. 
❑Describes that part of database that is relevant to a particular user.
2.Conceptual Level
❑Community view of the database.  
❑Describes what data is stored in database and relationships among the 
data. 
3.Internal Level
❑Physical representation of the database on the computer.  
❑Describes how the data is stored in the database. 
❑Depends on specific database software
◼Change in DBMS software requires internal model be changed

Schemas, Mapping and Instances
❑Database Schema (intension of the database)
✓The description of the database.
✓Specified during design process.
✓Do not change frequently unlike actual data.
❑Database Instance (extension/state of database)
✓The data in database at particular point in time.
✓Same DB schema –many instances. Describes that part of database that is 
relevant to a particular user.
❑Conceptual/Internal mapping
✓to find actual record in physical storage -logical record in conc. schema.
❑External/Conceptual mapping
✓to map names in user’s view to the relevant part of the conc. schema.

Data Independence and the ANSI -SPARC 
Three -level Architecture

Database Languages
◼Data Definition Language (DDL)
➢Allows the DBA or user to describe and name entities, attributes, and 
relationships required for the application.
➢Used to define a schema or modify an existing one.
➢plus any associated integrity and security constraints .
◼Data Manipulation Language (DML)
➢Provides basic data manipulation operations on data held in the database e.g. 
Insert, delete, update records.
❑Procedural DML : allows user to tell system exactly how to manipulate 
data. Embedded in high level languages.
❑Non-Procedural DML : allows user to state what data is needed rather 
than how it is to be retrieved.

Database Languages
❑Fourth Generation Language (4GL)
4GL are non -procedural languages, but define parameters for the tools that 
uses them to generate an application program.
❑Forms Generators: 
✓an interactive facility for rapidly creating data input and display outputs for 
screen forms.
❑Report Generators:
✓retrieves stored data from database and create reports.
❑Graphics Generators : 
✓retrieves data from database and display the data as a graph.
❑Application Generators :
✓that define, insert, update and retrieve data from the database to build 
applications.

Data Models
◼Data Model
Integrated collection of concepts for describing data, relationships between 
data, and constraints on the data in an organization.
❑Object -based Data Models
✓Entity -Relationship
✓Semantic
✓Functional
✓Object -Oriented
❑Record -based Data Models
✓Relational Data Model
✓Network Data Model
✓Hierarchical Data Model
❑Physical Data Models

Data Models and Conceptual Modeling
◼Conceptual Modeling (Conceptual DB Design)
✓Conceptual modeling is process of developing a model of information use 
that is independent of implementation details.
✓Result is a conceptual data model.
✓Conceptual schema is the core of a system supporting all user views.
✓Independent of implementation.
✓Should be complete and accurate representation of an organization's data 
requirements.

DBMS Functions
❑Data storage, retrieval, and update
❑A user -accessible catalog
❑Transaction support
❑Concurrency control services
❑Recovery services
❑Authorization services
❑Support for data communication
❑Integrity services
❑Services to promote data independence
❑Utility services –import , monitor, analysis, garbage 
collection

DATABASE ARCHITECTURE

DATABASE ARCHITECTURE
oMulti -user DBMS Architectures
oWeb services and Service -oriented 
Architectures
oDistributed DBMS
oData Warehousing

1. Multi -User DBMS Architectures
1.1Teleprocessing
1.2File-Server Architecture
1.3Two-TierClient -Server Architecture
1.4Three -TierClient -Server Architecture
1.5N-TierArchitectures
1.6Transaction Processing Monitors

1.1Teleprocessing (1970 s)
◼Traditional architecture.
◼Single mainframe with anumber ofterminals
attached .
◼Theterminals depended onthemainframe
◼The database software resided inthe
mainframe computer .Almost allcomputer
processing was done on these large
mainframe computers .

Teleprocessing Topology
CPU
Terminal 3Terminal 1
Terminal 2
Terminal 4 Terminal 5

1.2File-Server (1980 s)
◼File-server is connected to several workstations 
across a network.
◼Database resides on file -server.
◼DBMS and applications run on each workstation.
◼Disadvantages include:
❑Significant network traffic.
❑Copy of DBMS on each workstation.
❑Concurrency, recovery and integrity control more 
complex .

File-server Architecture

1.3 Two -Tier Client -server Architecture
(1990s)
◼Server holds thedatabase andtheDBMS .
◼Client manages user interface and runs applications.
◼Uses the internet and fast processing servers to 
meet the needs.
◼Advantages include :
❑wider access toexisting databases
❑increased performance
❑possible reduction inhardware/software costs
❑reduction incommunication costs
❑increased consistency .

Two-TierClient -server Architecture

Client -server Architectures
Generally a DBMS is divided into twoparts:
◼Client –program that handles the main business 
and data processing logic and interfaces with the 
user;
◼Server –program that manages and control 
access to the database
~~ two -tier architecture/ client -server architecture

Variation of Client -server Architectures
1.4 Three -Tier architecture
Client server (User interface layer)
Application server (Business logic and data processing layer)
Database server (DBMS/storage) 
1.5 Four -Tier architecture ( N-Tier)
❑Three -Tier architecture can be expanded to N-Tier
1.Client (User interface layer)
2.Application server (Business logic and data processing layer)
3.Database server (DBMS/storage) 
4.Web server

Three -Tier Client -server Architectures
1.6 Transaction Processing Monitors
◼Program that controls data transfer 
between clients and servers in order to 
provide a consistent environment, 
particularly for Online Transaction 
Processing (OLTP).

Transaction Processing Monitor as middle 
tier of a three -tier client -server architecture

2. Web services and Service -oriented Architectures
◼Service -oriented Architectures 
Software system that supports interoperable 
machine -to-machine interaction over a 
network
❑No user interface
❑For example: Web services
❑Uses widely accepted technologies and 
standards

Relationship between WSDL,UDDI, and 
SOAP
*XML : eXtensible Markup Language
*WSDL : Web Services Description 
Language* SOAP : Simple Object Access 
Protocol
*UDDI : Universal Discovery, Description 
and Integration

3. Distributed DBMS
◼Distributed database
Logically interrelated collection of shared data, physically 
distributed over a computer network.
◼Distributed DBMS
Software system that permits the management of the distributed 
database. And makes the distribution transparent to users.

Distributed DBMS

Characteristics of Distributed DBMS
❑Collection of logically related shared data
❑Data split into fragments
❑Fragments may be replicated
❑Fragments/replicas are allocated to sites
❑Sites are linked by a communications network
❑Data at each site is controlled by DBMS
❑DBMS handles local apps autonomously
❑Each DBMS in one or more global app

Distributed Processing
The difference between Distributed DBMS and 
Distributed Processing:
◼In Distributed DBMS, system consists of data is 
physically distributed across a number of sites in the 
network,
◼In Distributed Processing, if the data is centralized, 
even though other users may be accessing the data over 
the network, will be treated as Distributed Processing 
and do not consider to be Distributed DBMS.

Distributed Processing

4. Data warehousing
◼Consolidated/integrated view of corporate data 
◼Drawn from disparate operational data sources 
◼Range of end -user access tools capable of 
supporting simple to highly complex queries to 
support decision making
◼Subject -oriented, integrated, time -variant, and 
nonvolatile

Typical Architecture of a Data Warehouse

DATA MODELLING USING 
THE ENTITY -
RELATIONSHIP(ER) MODEL

Entity -Relationship (ER) Model
◼It is a basis of an Entity Relationship Diagram (ERD).
◼Top-down approach to database design that begins by 
identifying the important data called:
❑Entities
❑Relationships
❑Attributes
❑Constraints
◼ER concepts can be represented pictorially in an ER 
Diagram using Unified Modelling Language (UML).

Entity -Relationship (ER) Model
The Attributes of The Student Entity: Chen and Crow’s Foot
Source: Coronel & Morris
Entity -Relationship (ER) Model

Entity -Relationship (ER) Model

Entity -Relationship (ER) Model

Entity -Relationship (ER) Model

Entity -Relationship (ER) Model

Entity -Relationship (ER) Model

Entity -Relationship (ER) Model
Crow’s Foot Notation

Entity -Relationship (ER) Model

Entity -Relationship (ER) Model

Entity -Relationship (ER) Model
Note: Please use Crow’s Foot Model in your Quiz, Test, Assignment and Examination.
The End of Lecture 1
Thank You

