UCCD2203 DATABASE SYSTEMS
Introduction to Data Modelling and Design Part 2
Lecture 2
By 
Mr. Cheang Kah Wai, Alvin
Department of Information Systems, FICT
Lecture 2 Topic: Introduction to Data 
Modelling and Design -Part 2
◼Enhanced Entity Relationship (EER) 
Modelling
◼The Relational Model
2

ENHANCED ENTITY 
RELATIONSHIP (EER) 
MODELLING
3

Enhanced Entity Relationship (EER) 
Model
◼Complexity of data structures being modeled has 
increased and application software requirements have 
become more stringent.
◼The need to capture more information in the data 
model has increased.
◼Extension to Entity Relationship (ER) Model.
◼Adding more semantic constructs to the original ER 
model.
4

EER Model  Entity Supertypes and Subtypes
◼Most employees possess a wide range of skills 
and special qualifications.
◼Data modelers must find a variety of ways to 
group employees based on their characteristics.
◼Example: 
❑A retail company can group employees as salaried 
and hourly
❑A university could group employees as faculty, staff, 
and administrators.
5

EER Model  Entity Supertypes and Subtypes
◼The benefits of grouping of employees 
into various types:
❑Avoid unnecessary nulls in attributes when 
some employees have characteristics that are 
not shared by other employees.
❑Enables a particular employee type to 
participate in relationships that are unique to 
that employee type.
6

EER Model  Entity Supertypes and Subtypes
◼Let’s explore an aviation business that employs 
pilots, mechanics, secretaries, accountants, 
database managers, and many other types of 
employees.
❑Pilots share certain characteristics with other 
employees, such as, last name and hire date.
❑Nevertheless, many pilot characteristics are not shared 
by other employees. 
❑Pilots must meet special requirements such as flight 
hour restrictions, flight checks and periodic training.
7

EER Model  Entity Supertypes and Subtypes
◼Therefore, if all employee characteristics and 
special qualifications were stored in a single 
EMPLOYEE entity, you will have a lot of 
nulls, or you will have to create needless 
dummy entries.
❑For example, employee license and employee 
ratings are only applicable (special 
characteristics) to pilots
❑This will create null values for employees who 
are not pilot.
8

EER Model  
Entity Supertypes and Subtypes
◼Pilots participate in some relationships that 
are unique to their qualifications.
❑For example, not all employees can fly airplanes; 
only employees who are pilots can participate in 
the “ employee flies airplane ” relationship.
9

EER Model  Entity Supertypes and Subtypes
◼PILOT entity stores only attributes that are unique to 
pilots and EMPLOYEE entity stores attributes that are 
common to all employees.
❑PILOT is a subtype of EMPLOYEE.
❑EMPLOYEE is a supertype of PILOT.
◼In modeling terms, an entity supertype is a generic 
entity type that is related to one or more entity 
subtypes .
❑The entity supertype contains common characteristics.
❑Each of the entity subtype contain their own unique 
characteristics.
Note: Supertypes and subtypes also known as superclasses and subclasses .
10

EER Model  
Entity Supertypes and Subtypes
◼Two criteria to help the database designer 
determines when to use subtypes and 
supertypes:
❑There must be different, identifiable kinds or 
types of the entity in the user’s environment.
❑The different kinds or types of instances should 
each have one or more attributes that are unique 
to that kind or type of instance.
11

EER Model  
Specialization
◼Process of defining a set of subtypes of an entity 
type (top -down).
❑Supertypes -Parent entities
❑Subtypes –Child entities
◼Specialization hierarchy reflects the 1:1 relationship 
between the supertype and its child entities.
❑For example, a PILOT subtype occurrence is related to 
one instance of the EMPLOYEE supertype.
12

EER Model  
Specialization
◼The relationships depicted within the 
specialization hierarchy are sometimes 
described in terms of “is -a” 
relationships.
❑For example, a pilot is an employee, a 
mechanic is an employee, and an 
accountant is an employee.
13

EER Model  
Specialization
◼Important to note: 
❑A subtype can exist only within the context of a 
supertype, and every subtype can have only one 
supertype to which it is directly related.
❑However, can have many levels of supertype or 
subtype relationships –you can have a 
specialization hierarchy in which a supertype has 
many subtypes. In turn, one of the subtypes is 
the supertype to other lower -level subtypes.
14

EER Model  
Specialization
◼HOURLY_EMPS is a subtype of EMPLOYEES and thus inherits its 
attributes and relationships.
◼CONTRACT_EMPS is a subtype of EMPLOYEES and thus inherits 
its attributes and relationships.
15

EER Model  
Specialization
◼Specialization hierarchies enable the data model to capture 
additional semantic content or meaning into the ERD.
❑Support attribute inheritance.
❑Define a special supertype attribute known as the subtype 
discriminator.
❑Define disjoint or overlapping constraints and complete or partial 
constraints.
16

EER Model  
Generalization
◼Bottom -up process of identifying a higher -level, more 
generic entity supertype from lower -level entity 
subtypes.
◼Based on grouping the common characteristics and 
relationships of the subtypes.
❑For example, you might identify multiple types of musical 
instruments: piano, violin, and guitar. Using the 
generalization approach, you could identify a “string 
instrument” entity supertype to hold the common 
characteristics of the multiple subtypes.
17

EER Model  
Generalization
18

EER Model  
Inheritance
◼The property of inheritance enables an entity 
subtype to inherit the attributes and 
relationships of the supertype.
◼One important inheritance characteristic is that 
all entity subtypes inherit their primary key 
attribute from their supertype.
◼Subtypes can have additional attributes and 
relationships. 
19

EER Model  
Subtype Discriminator
◼A subtype discriminator is the attribute in 
the supertype entity that determines to 
which subtype the supertype occurrence is 
related.
20

EER Model  
Disjoint and Overlapping Constraints
◼Disjoint subtypes (also known as non-
overlapping subtypes) are subtypes that contain 
a unique subset of the supertype entity set.
❑For example, an employee (supertype) who is a pilot 
(subtype) can appear only in the PILOT subtype, not 
in any of the other subtypes.
❑In an ERD, disjoint types are indicated by the letter d
inside the category shape.
21

EER Model  
Disjoint and Overlapping Constraints
◼Overlapping subtypes are subtypes that contain non -
unique subsets of the supertype entity set; that is, each 
entity instance of the supertype may appear in more than 
one subtype.
❑For example, in a university environment, a person may be an 
employee, a student, or both.
❑In turn, an employee may be a professor as well as an administrator.
❑STUDENT and EMPLOYEE are overlapping subtypes of the 
supertype PERSON.
❑PROFESSOR and ADMINISTRATOR are overlapping subtypes 
of the supertype EMPLOYEE.
❑In an ERD, overlapping subtypes are indicated by the letter oinside 
the category shape.
22

EER Model  
Completeness Constraints
◼Thecompleteness constraint specifies whether each 
entity supertype occurrence must also be a member of 
at least one subtype –can be partial or total.
◼Partial completeness means that not every supertype 
occurrence is a member of a subtype; some supertype 
occurrences may not be members of any subtype.
◼Total completeness means that every supertype 
occurrence must be a member of at least one subtype.
23

EER Model  
24
Source: Coronel & Morris, Database Systems: Design, Implementation, & Management, 13e.
THE RELATIONAL MODEL
25

The origins of the Relational Model
◼Proposed by E.F.Codd (1970)
◼Pioneer projects such as at IBM’s relational DBMS System R, and 
UC-Berkeley’s relational Model INGRES (in mid -1970s)
◼Today, still the dominant database model:
◼IBM DB2, ORACLE, INFORMIX, SYBASE
◼MICROSOFT Access, SQL Server
◼FOXBASE, PARADOX
◼Still more….
◼In the relational model, all data is logically structured within relations 
(tables).
26

Terminologies used in Relational Model
Relational Model is based on the mathematical concept of a relation 
(physically represented as Table ).
◼Relation :  A Relation is a table with Rows and Columns .
◼Attribute :  An Attribute is a named column of a relation.
◼Domain : A Domain is the set of allowable values for one or more attributes .
◼Tuple : A Tuple is a row of a relation .
◼Degree : The Degree of a Relation is the number of attributes it contains . 
Unary relation, binary relation, ternary & n -aryrelations
◼Cardinality : The Cardinality of a relation is the number of tuples it 
contains .
◼Relational Database : A collection of normalized relations with 
distinct relation names.
27

Instances of the Branch and Staff relations
28
Refer: Fig4.1, Page: 145
Example of Attribute Domains
29
Refer: Fig 4.2, Page: 145

Relational Model Terms and their SQL 
Equivalents
30
Refer: Table 4.1, Page: 146

Attribute domain can be shared
31CREATE DOMAIN street ASVARCHAR 2(30),
CREATE TABLE student(
StNo number( 6)NOT NULL,
…
StStreet street,
….);
CREATE TABLE faculty(
FaNo number( 4)NOT NULL,
…
FaStreet street,
….);

Database relations
◼What is Schema?
➢It is the structure of a database system, described in a formal language 
supported by the Database Management System (DBMS). 
➢In a relational database, the schema defines the tables, the fields in 
each table, and the relationships between fields and tables.
➢Schemas are generally stored in a data dictionary. 
➢Although a schema is defined in text database language, the term is 
often used to refer to a graphical depiction of the database structure.
◼Relation schema :
➢Named relation defined by a set of attribute and domain name pairs.
S1 = {branchno:B005, street:22, city:London }
R1 = { S1,S2,….., Sn}
◼Relational database schema :
➢Set of relation schemas, each with a distinct name.
R = { R1, R2, R3,....,Rn}
32

Example of a Relation
33
Relation 
Instance
Relation 
Schema
S1
S2
S3
S4
Relation Schema
R1={S1,S2,S3,…,Sn}
Relational Database Schema
R={R1,R2,R3,....,Rn}

Relational Database Schema –Textual Form 
(DreamHome Rental)
34
underlined attributes arePrimary keys.
Usually asterisk marked (*)attributes areforeign keys, e.g.*staffNo .
Relational Database Schema isalso simply known asRelational Schema

Relational Database Schema –Graphical 
Form (DreamHome Rental)
35

Properties of Relations
◼Relation name is distinct from all other relation names 
in relational schema.
◼Each cell of relation contains exactly one atomic 
(single) value.
◼Each attribute has a distinct name.
◼Values of an attribute are all from the same domain.
◼Each tuple is distinct; there are no duplicate tuples .
◼Order of attributes and of tuples has no significance.
36

Relational Keys
◼Superkey
An attribute, or a set of attributes, that uniquely identifies a tuple
within a relation.
May contain additional attributes not necessarily be unique. e.g. 
Icno, stid, (stname,major ), (stid,stname )
◼Candidate Key
A minimal superkey . A superkey is minimal if removing any 
columns makes it no longer unique.
The candidate key has two properties: uniqueness and 
irreducibility.
37

Relational Keys (contd..)
◼Primary Key : 
The candidate key that is selected to identify tuples uniquely  within relation.
Every record must have a primary key and primary key cannot be NULL .
An attribute ( or combination of attributes ) that uniquely identifies any 
given row.
Alternate Key/Secondary Key : The candidate keys that are not selected as 
primary key.
◼Foreign Key : 
An attribute, or set of attributes, within one relation that matches the 
candidate key of some ( possibly the same ) relation.
Foreign key creates a relationship between the two tables.
Foreign key value must exist in the table where referred to.
38

Relational Keys (contd..)
◼Surrogate Key: 
➢Created to be the record’s primary key identifier when no 
suitable primary key exists
➢Surrogate key has no real relationship to the record to which 
it is assigned, other than to identify the record uniquely
➢Developers configure the database to generate surrogate key 
values automatically
➢Surrogate keys are always numerical fields, because the 
database generates surrogate key values automatically by 
incrementing the previous value by one
39

Example for Relational keys
40
Examples :There aremany superkeys inthesample table above .
Forexample, (SSN),(SSN, Phone Extension, Name )and (SSN, Name ),etc.Ofthose listed,
only <SSN>isacandidate key, astheothers contain information notnecessary touniquely
identify records .
Superkey ={SSN, Ph.Ext.,(SSN, Ph.Ext.),(SSN, Age), (SSN, Name), (SSN, Age, Name), (SSN,
Ph.Ext.,Age, Name), …………… ………… ...}
Composite Key ={(SSN, Ph.Ext.),(SSN, Age, Name), ………………… .}
Candidate Key ={SSN, Ph.Ext.}
Primary Key ={SSN}
Alternate Key ={Ph.Ext.}
*Assume onestaff isonly assigned tooneTelephone Extension andthere aretwostaffs with thesame name .

Example for Relational keys
41Example: Consider the following tables:
Staff(staffNo , SSN, name, position, salary, branchNo )
Branch (branchNo,street,city,state,zipCode , mgrStaffNo )
◼SuperKey = {staffNo , (staffNo , name), ( staffNo , position), 
(staffNo , SSN), ( staffNo , branchNo ), (staffNo , name, 
position), ( staffNo , name, salary), ( SSN,name ), … }
◼Candidate Key = {staffNo , SSN}
◼Primary Key = {staffNo }
◼Foreign Key = { branchNo , mgrStaffNo }

Composite Key
◼is a unique key that you create by combining two or more fields
◼is usually comprised of fields that are primary keys in other tables 
42Composite key(S_ID andCOURSE_ID combined ).The value combinations must beunique .

Constraints
43Rules thatrestrict thedata values thatyoucanenter into afield ina
database table.
◼Types ofconstraint :
❑Integrity constraints :Define primary andforeign keys.
◼Entity Integrity :Inabase relation, noattribute ofaprimary
keycanbenull.Notworows with thesame primary keyvalue
◼Referential Integrity :Ifforeign keyexists inarelation, either
foreign keyvalue must match acandidate keyvalue ofsome
tuple initshome relation orforeign keyvalue must bewholly
null.
❑Value/Field/Domain Constraint :limits thevalue that canbe
placed inaspecific field, irrespective ofvalues thatexist inother
table records .

Constraints (contd…)
44❑General constraints :Additional rule specified by
users ordatabase administrators ofadatabase that
define orconstrain some aspect oftheenterprise .
E.g.Only 20workers canwork inaBranch ora
convent school only accept female students .

Constraints (contd…)
45The following are the Value Constraints :
◼Check constraints : field value must be a specific value or fall within a 
range of values
Eg: s_class CHAR(2) CONSTRAINT student_s_class_cc CHECK
((s_class = 'FR') OR(s_class = 'SO') OR(s_class = 'JR') OR(s_class = 
'SR'))
◼NOT NULL constraints : Specify whether a field value can be NULL
◼Unique constraints : Specify that a field must have a unique value for 
every table record
◼Default constraints : Specify that a field has a default value that the 
DBMS automatically inserts for every record, unless the user specifies an 
alternate value
Eg… (hire_date DATE DEFAULT SYSDATE ,) …

Table Creation With Constraints
46CREATE TABLE faculty
(f_id NUMBER( 6),
f_last VARCHAR 2(30)NOT NULL ,
f_first VARCHAR 2(30),
loc_id NUMBER( 6),
f_phone VARCHAR 2(10),
f_rank VARCHAR 2(8)CONSTRAINT fac_f_rank_cc CHECK ((f_rank =
‘ASSO’)
OR(f_rank =‘PROF') OR(f_rank =‘TUTO’) OR(f_rank =‘LECT')),
f_sal NUMBER( 8,2)NOT NULL DEFAULT 0,
F_email VARCHAR 2(30)UNIQUE ,
CONSTRAINT faculty_f_id_pk PRIMARY KEY (f_id),
CONSTRAINT faculty_loc_id_fk FOREIGN KEY (loc_id )
REFERENCES location( loc_id ));

Understanding NULL Value
47◼Represents value foranattribute that iscurrently
unknown ornotapplicable fortuple .
◼Deals with incomplete orexceptional data.
◼Represents theabsence ofavalue andisnotthesame
aszero orspaces ,which arevalues .
Eg:INSERT INTO student (StId,StLname ,
StFname , StAdId ) values (10090 ,
‘Cooper ’,‘Samantha ’,NULL )

Enforcing Referential Integrity Constraint
48Consider Enroll andStudent
◼Student (sid,name, login, cgpa )
◼Enrolled (sid,cid,grade)
What should bedone ifanEnrolled tuple with anon-existent
student idisinserted?
◼Create thenon-existent Student IDatStudent table.
◼Pick thevalid Student IDfrom Student table.
What should bedone ifaStudent tuple isdeleted/updated?
◼The values from theEnrolled table referencing Student table
should beupdated/deleted aswell.

Enforcing Referential Integrity 
Constraint
49❑Cascade delete
❑Cascade update
❑Noaction/restrict
❑SetDefault
❑SetNull
Appropriate action depends onthetables involved .

Views
A view is a virtual or derived relation.
◼Base Relation
Named relation corresponding to an entity in 
conceptual schema, whose tuples are physically stored 
in database.
◼View
Dynamic result of one or more relational operations 
operating on base relations to produce another relation . 
50

Base Relation and View
51
Base Relation
(AllData inStaff Table)View 1(Vertical View)
View 2(Horizontal View)

52Views
◼A virtual relation that does not necessarily, actually 
exist in the database but is produced upon request, at 
time of request.
◼Allows each user to have his or her own view of the 
database.
◼A view is essentially some subset of the database.
◼Contents of a view are defined as a query on one or 
more base relations. 
◼Views are dynamic, meaning that changes made to 
base relations that affect view attributes are 
immediately reflected in the view. 

Simple View
CREATE VIEW faculty_view AS
SELECT f_id, f_last , f_first , f_mi, loc_id , f_phone , f_rank
FROM faculty;
53CREATE [OR REPLACE] VIEW viewname [(alias,[alias]….)] 
AS subquery
[WITH CHECK OPTION [CONSTRAINT constraint ]]
[WITH READ ONLY[CONSTRAINT constraint ]]Creating a view

54Advantages and Disadvantages of Views
ADVANTAGES DISADVANTAGES
Data Independence Update restriction
Currency Structure restriction
Improved Security Performance
Reduced Complexity
Convenience
Customization
Data Integrity

The End of Lecture 2
Thank You
55

